Add draft threat model + SECURITY.md/AGENTS.md discoverability (#3966)
apache/jena: THREAT_MODEL.md

## §1 Header

- **Project:** Apache Jena (`apache/jena`), `main`, against which this draft was written. A monorepo: the RDF/SPARQL Java framework (`jena-core`, `jena-arq`, `jena-base`, RIOT parsers, `jena-tdb1`/`jena-tdb2` stores, SHACL/ShEx, GeoSPARQL, text index) **and** the Fuseki HTTP server (`jena-fuseki2`).
- **Date:** 2026-06-02. **Status:** draft — for Apache Jena PMC review. **Author:** ASF Security team (drafted via the Scovetta threat-model rubric), for PMC ratification.
- **Version binding:** versioned with the project; a report against version *N* is triaged against the model as it stood at *N*.
- **Reporting cross-reference:** §8-property violations → report privately per ASF process (`security@apache.org` → `private@jena.apache.org`); §3/§9 findings are closed citing this document.
- **Provenance legend:** *(documented)* = Jena's own docs/repo; *(maintainer)* = confirmed by a Jena PMC member through this process (andy@ has ratified destination + the help-with-model request); *(inferred)* = reasoned from architecture, not yet confirmed — each has a matching §14 open question.
- **Draft confidence:** ~12 documented / ~2 maintainer / ~34 inferred.

> - **What Jena is:** Apache Jena is a Java framework for building Semantic-Web / linked-data applications over RDF. It provides an in-process API to RDF data held in memory or in a native store (TDB), the ARQ SPARQL query/update engine, RIOT parsers/serialisers for RDF syntaxes (Turtle, RDF/XML, JSON-LD, N-Triples, …), and **Fuseki** — a standalone HTTP server exposing SPARQL query, SPARQL Update, and the Graph Store Protocol over the network. *(documented — README, jena.apache.org; maintainer — andy@ 2026-06-01: "an HTTP-based data server (Fuseki) and a Java API to RDF data stored in memory and in a custom database")*

Reviewer: JSON-LD is provided by a dependency.

There is work in the current JSON-LD W3C Working Group to document and provide mitigation for the issue that JSON-LD reads remote file. 

It is safer than XML External Entities but nevertheless, it's an issue.

## §2 Scope and intended use

- **Two deployment shapes** *(maintainer — andy@)*:

>   - **Fuseki** — a long-running **HTTP server** that answers SPARQL over the network. The primary network trust surface.

Reviewer: For cokpletness, list the different parts of the SPARQL family.

```suggestion
  - **Fuseki** — a long-running **HTTP server** that answers SPARQL Query and SPARQL Update as well as the SPARQL Graph Store Protocol (read and read-write forms) over the network. The primary network trust surface.
```

  - **The Jena Java API** — `jena-core`/`jena-arq`/TDB embedded **in-process** in another application. Trusted caller; the bytes/queries it feeds Jena are that application's responsibility.
- **Caller roles** (Fuseki is a network service — the role splits):

>   - **anonymous SPARQL client** — issues SPARQL queries over HTTP. **Default-public for query** *(documented — Fuseki security docs: "SPARQL endpoints are open to the public but administrative functions are limited to localhost")*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **anonymous SPARQL client** — issues SPARQL queries over HTTP. **Default-public for SPARQL query** *(documented — Fuseki security docs: "SPARQL endpoints are open to the public but administrative functions are limited to localhost")*.
```
SPARQL Update and Graph Store Protocol update are not the default for TDB2 stored data.
They are default for the in-memory configuration if the server is started with no initial data.

  - **authenticated user / admin** — gated by Apache Shiro (`shiro.ini`); admin functions (`/$/*`) restricted to localhost by default *(documented)*.
  - **operator/deployer** — configures Shiro, datasets, TDB location, and which endpoints are read-only vs updatable. **Trusted.** *(inferred)*
  - **embedding application** (Java API) — trusted; supplies queries/RDF to the library. *(inferred)*

> 

Reviewer: Jena also provides a Lucene-based text index component including in Fuseki.
Should that be included here?

**Component-family table** *(monorepo; in/out of model):*

| Family | Entry point | Touches OS/network | In model? |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Fuseki HTTP server | `jena-fuseki2` — SPARQL query / Update / Graph Store Protocol, admin `/$/*` | network (listens) | **In — primary boundary** *(documented)* |
| SPARQL engine (ARQ) | `jena-arq` — query/update eval, `SERVICE` federation, custom functions | network out (SERVICE), file (file: URLs) | **In — high value** *(inferred)* |
| RDF I/O (RIOT) | `jena-arq`/`jena-core` parsers (RDF/XML, Turtle, JSON-LD, …) | parses untrusted RDF | **In — XXE / parser-DoS surface** *(inferred)* |

> | Stores | `jena-tdb1`, `jena-tdb2`, `jena-db` | filesystem | **In (engine's use); on-disk store is operator-trusted** *(inferred)* |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Stores | `jena-tdb1`, `jena-tdb2`, `jena-text` | filesystem | **In (engine's use); on-disk store is operator-trusted** *(inferred)* |
```
`jena-db` is the module that provides a database framework. TDB2 uses it. TDB2 is the actual database.

TDB1 predates jena-db.

`jena-text` (Lucene-based) is also a persistent, read-write storage component.
Should it be listed here rather than later?

| IRI / langtag | `jena-iri3986`, `jena-langtag`, `jena-base` | none | **In (input parsing)** *(inferred)* |

> | Validation / extensions | `jena-shacl`, `jena-shex`, `jena-geosparql`, `jena-text`, `jena-serviceenhancer` | text index; SERVICE | **In (reachable from queries)** *(inferred)* |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Validation / extensions | `jena-shacl`, `jena-shex`, `jena-geosparql`, `jena-serviceenhancer` | SERVICE | **In (reachable from queries)** *(inferred)* |
```

- **The embedding application's own use of the Java API** — if an app feeds attacker-controlled SPARQL it built by string-concatenation to ARQ, that injection is the app's bug, not Jena's (analogous to SQL injection in a JDBC caller). *(inferred)*
- **Generic DoS / query-complexity exhaustion** beyond a to-be-confirmed line — Andy raised resource-volume as a concern; the §8 resource line + §14 frame it. *(inferred)*
- **Confidentiality of RDF data at rest / TLS on the wire** — operator deployment (reverse proxy for TLS; filesystem perms for TDB). *(inferred)*

## §4 Trust boundaries and data flow

- **Primary boundary: the Fuseki SPARQL endpoint.** Queries arrive over HTTP from (by default) **anonymous** clients. The boundary question is what an anonymous/low-privilege SPARQL query can reach: read data it shouldn't, **write** (SPARQL Update / GSP) without authorisation, make Fuseki issue outbound requests (`SERVICE` → SSRF), read local files (`file:` URLs / FROM), execute code (ARQ custom/JavaScript functions if enabled), or exhaust resources. *(inferred; public-query default documented)*

> - **Admin boundary:** the `/$/*` admin surface is localhost-only by default *(documented)*; exposing it to the network is an operator misconfiguration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Admin boundary:** the `/$/*` admin surface is localhost-only by default *(documented)*; exposing it to the network (without configuring authentication/authorisation) is an operator misconfiguration.
```

> - **RDF-parse boundary:** any endpoint that **parses** caller-supplied RDF (Update bodies, GSP PUT/POST, content negotiation) runs RIOT on untrusted bytes — the XXE (RDF/XML) and parser-DoS surface. *(inferred)*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **RDF-parse boundary:** any endpoint that **parses** caller-supplied RDF (Update bodies, GSP PUT/POST, content negotiation) runs RIOT on untrusted bytes — the XXE (RDF/XML), JSON-LD Context, and parser-DoS surface. *(inferred)*
```

- **Reachability preconditions:**
  - A finding in ARQ/RIOT/stores is **in-model** iff reachable from a Fuseki request at the relevant role (default: anonymous query; authenticated for Update). *(inferred)*
  - A finding reachable only through the **in-process Java API** with caller-supplied trusted input is `OUT-OF-MODEL: trusted-input` (the embedding app owns it). *(inferred)*
  - A finding requiring operator config (`shiro.ini`, exposing admin, enabling JS functions) is `OUT-OF-MODEL: trusted-input` / `non-default-build`. *(inferred)*

## §5 Assumptions about the environment

- **Runtime:** JVM (Java; "old in places" per andy@). *(maintainer)*
- **Fuseki auth:** Apache Shiro via `$FUSEKI_BASE/shiro.ini`; changing it needs a restart *(documented — Fuseki security docs)*.

> - **Store:** TDB1/TDB2 on the local filesystem, assumed private to the Fuseki/JVM process. *(inferred)*

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Store:** TDB1/TDB2 on the local filesystem, private to the owning Fuseki/JVM process, multiple processes accessing a single store location prevented by code. *(maintainer)*
```

- **Network:** TLS is the deployer's (reverse proxy); Fuseki's bundled example setup is plaintext *(documented — "no TLS, passwords in plain text")*.

> - **Negative side-effects inventory** (inferred — wave-1/2 target): Fuseki listens on HTTP; ARQ can make **outbound** network requests via `SERVICE` (federation) and can read **`file:`/http: URLs** named in queries (FROM/FROM NAMED/SERVICE); RIOT parses untrusted RDF; ARQ may execute **custom/JavaScript functions** if the operator enabled them; TDB reads/writes the data directory. *(inferred — these are the load-bearing confirmations)*

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Negative side-effects inventory** (inferred — wave-1/2 target): Fuseki listens on HTTP; ARQ can make **outbound** network requests via `SERVICE` (federation), `SERVICE` can be disabled by operator in configuration; ARQ can read **`file:`/http: URLs** named in queries (FROM/FROM NAMED/SERVICE); RIOT parses untrusted RDF; ARQ may execute **custom/JavaScript functions** if the operator enabled them; TDB reads/writes the data directory. *(inferred — these are the load-bearing confirmations)*
```

Reviewer 2: @afs On the point of reading `file:`/`http` URLs in queries/updates isn't that partly a feature of what dataset implementation is used i.e. is this something the operator can control/disable by choice of configuration?

## §5a Build-time and configuration variants

Security-relevant configuration *(Fuseki auth documented; the rest inferred — confirm defaults):*

| Knob | Default | Effect / stance |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Fuseki Shiro auth (`shiro.ini`) | SPARQL **query** public; admin `/$/*` **localhost-only** | *(documented)* Restricting query access requires Shiro `[urls]` ACLs. |
| Fuseki example user setup | `admin`/`pw`, plaintext, no TLS | *(documented)* explicitly "not recommended for production". Any "default admin/pw in prod" report → `OUT-OF-MODEL: non-default-build`. |

> | SPARQL **Update** / Graph Store write | per-dataset (read-only vs read-write service) — **default to confirm** | *(inferred)* If a dataset ships update-enabled + unauthenticated, anonymous write is in-model; if read-only by default, anonymous write is not reachable. **Wave-1 question.** |

Reviewer: The default is not enabled for persistent storage or data from a file; enabled on an empty in-memory store.

> | `SERVICE` (federated query) | **to confirm** (enabled? restrictable allow-list?) | *(inferred)* SSRF surface; whether it can be disabled / allow-listed is the key §10 lever. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `SERVICE` (federated query) | may be disabled by operator config **(documented)** | *(inferred)* SSRF surface
```

Documentation references:

- https://jena.apache.org/documentation/query/service.html#controlling-service-requests
- https://jena.apache.org/documentation/fuseki2/fuseki-configuration.html#server-configuration

> | ARQ **JavaScript / custom functions** | **to confirm** (opt-in?) | *(inferred)* If enabled, SPARQL can execute code → by-design-if-operator-enabled, like a trusted extension. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| ARQ **JavaScript / custom functions** | opt-in feature, requires explicit operator config of both Fuseki and JVM | *(inferred)* If enabled, SPARQL can execute code, executable JS functions controlled by explicit white list *(documented)*, some JS functions, e.g. `eval()`, are explicitly blacklisted regardless of whitelist → by-design-if-operator-enabled, like a trusted extension.  Java custom functions require explicit operator configuration of class path, if added to class path operator responsibility to verify function code is safe |
```

Reviewer 2: Documentation references:

- https://jena.apache.org/documentation/query/javascript-functions.html#requirements
- https://jena.apache.org/documentation/query/javascript-functions.html#identifying-callable-functions

> | RDF/XML & external-entity handling in RIOT | **to confirm** (XXE off by default?) | *(inferred)* Whether external entities / `file:` access are disabled by default in the parsers. |

Reviewer: XXE off. See class `JenaXMLInput`. Cannot be turned on.
```suggestion
| RDF/XML & external-entity handling in RIOT | XXE off | *(inferred)* Whether external entities / `file:` access are disabled by default in the parsers. |
| JSON_LD & external context handling in RIOT | On | Accessed by http/https or local file. |
```

**Double check** the situation for JSON-LD.

> | Query timeout / result limits | **to confirm** | *(inferred)* the resource/DoS lever (Andy's concern). |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Query timeout / result limits | query timeout configurable at server or per-dataset level *(documented)* | *(inferred)* the resource/DoS lever (Andy's concern). |
```

Documentation reference - https://jena.apache.org/documentation/fuseki2/fuseki-configuration.html#server-section

## §6 Assumptions about inputs

Per-surface trust table *(Fuseki defaults documented; the rest inferred):*

| Surface | Input | Attacker-controllable? | Caller/operator must enforce |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Fuseki SPARQL query endpoint | SPARQL query text | **yes (anonymous by default)** | Shiro ACLs if data is sensitive; SERVICE/file/JS-function restrictions; query timeout |
| Fuseki SPARQL Update / GSP | update text / RDF body | **yes — must be authorised** | read-only-by-default or Shiro-gated write; RDF parse hardening |
| RDF parse (RIOT) anywhere | RDF/XML, Turtle, JSON-LD, … | **yes** | external-entity (XXE) off; bounded nesting/size |

> | `SERVICE <url>` in a query | target URL | **yes** | SSRF egress controls / allow-list |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `SERVICE <url>` in a query | target URL | **yes** | Disable if not desired; SSRF egress controls / allow-list if enabled |
```

> | `FROM` / `FROM NAMED` / `file:` URI | dataset URI | **yes** | block `file:` and arbitrary fetch from untrusted queries |

Reviewer 2: @afs Again isn't this partly down to choice of dataset implementation in config?

Reviewer: `FROM`/`FROM NAMED` with "file:" should be graph names in the dataset, not  local file access. 

We need to check all cases but it is the case for default choices.

- **Authenticated low-privilege user** — bounded by Shiro/dataset ACLs; goal: exceed them. *(inferred)*
- **Crafted-RDF attacker** — supplies malicious RDF (RDF/XML XXE, deeply-nested/oversized documents) to any parse path. *(inferred)*
- **Out of scope:** operator/host control; the embedding app supplying its own trusted input; anyone who can edit `shiro.ini` or enable JS functions. *(inferred)*

## §8 Security properties the project provides

*(All inferred pending PMC confirmation except where Fuseki defaults are documented.)*

- **Admin surface is localhost-bound by default.** Fuseki's `/$/*` admin functions are not reachable from the network unless the operator exposes them. *Violation symptom:* an admin function reachable anonymously over the network in the default config. *Severity:* CVE-class. *(documented — Fuseki security docs)*
- **Shiro access control is enforced when configured.** A Shiro `[urls]` ACL restricting an endpoint cannot be bypassed by request manipulation. *Violation symptom:* a restricted endpoint reached without satisfying its Shiro rule. *Severity:* CVE-class. *(inferred)*

> - **SPARQL queries cannot escape the dataset's authorised scope.** An anonymous/low-priv query cannot read graphs, write data, reach the filesystem, or make Fuseki act as an SSRF proxy beyond what the dataset config permits. *Violation symptom:* SERVICE-SSRF, `file:` read, cross-graph read, or unauthorised write from an in-scope query. *Severity:* CVE-class. *(inferred — the core boundary to ratify; these are the classic Jena CVE classes)*

Reviewer: `SERVICE` lets any query make HTTP read calls to another machine.

> - **SPARQL queries cannot escape the dataset's authorised scope.** An anonymous/low-priv query cannot read graphs, write data, reach the filesystem, or make Fuseki act as an SSRF proxy beyond what the dataset config permits. *Violation symptom:* SERVICE-SSRF, `file:` read, cross-graph read, or unauthorised write from an in-scope query. *Severity:* CVE-class. *(inferred — the core boundary to ratify; these are the classic Jena CVE classes)*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **SPARQL operations cannot escape the dataset's authorised scope.** An anonymous/low-priv query cannot read graphs, write data, reach the filesystem, or make Fuseki act as an SSRF proxy beyond what the dataset config permits. *Violation symptom:* SERVICE-SSRF, `file:` read, cross-graph read, or unauthorised write from an in-scope query. *Severity:* CVE-class. *(inferred — the core boundary to ratify; these are the classic Jena CVE classes)*
```

- **RDF parsing is safe against untrusted documents.** RIOT parsing of attacker RDF does not resolve external entities (XXE), execute code, or recurse/allocate unboundedly. *Violation symptom:* XXE, SSRF, or DoS from a parsed RDF document. *Severity:* CVE-class. *(inferred)*

> - **Resource bounds — UNSPECIFIED.** Whether an expensive SPARQL query (Andy's volume concern) or a large RDF body is a bug or an operator-tuned limit (query timeout) is open. *(inferred)*

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Resource bounds.** Expensive SPARQL queries, or large RDF bodies are an operator-tuned limit (query timeout). *(maintainer)*
```

## §9 Security properties the project does *not* provide

- **No protection if the operator exposes the admin surface, ships the example `admin`/`pw` setup, or runs without TLS** — deployment hardening (pending §5a rulings). *(documented that the example setup is not for production)*
- **No defense when ARQ JavaScript/custom functions are enabled on an untrusted endpoint** — enabling code-executing functions and exposing them to anonymous queries is operator-chosen code execution (by-design, like a trusted extension), pending confirmation. *(inferred)* **False friend:** a SPARQL endpoint being "read-only" does not by itself prevent SSRF (`SERVICE`) or local-file read (`file:`) unless those are separately restricted.
- **No SPARQL-injection defense for the embedding application** — an app that concatenates untrusted input into a query string owns that bug (use parameterised queries / `QueryBuilder`). *(inferred)*
- **No transport security / authentication unless the operator configures Shiro + TLS.** *(documented/inferred)*

> - **No generic-DoS / query-complexity guarantee** beyond a to-be-stated line. *(inferred)*

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **No generic-DoS / query-complexity guarantee** beyond query time limits. *(inferred)*
```

> - **No generic-DoS / query-complexity guarantee** beyond a to-be-stated line. *(inferred)*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **No generic-DoS / query-complexity guarantee** beyond a to-be-stated line.
```
Confirmed.

## §11 Known misuse patterns

*(Draft one-liners — expand before publishing.)*

- Exposing a public, update-enabled SPARQL endpoint with no auth. *(inferred)*
- Leaving `SERVICE`/`file:` reachable from anonymous queries (SSRF / file read). *(inferred)*
- Enabling ARQ JS functions on a public endpoint. *(inferred)*
- Shipping the example `admin`/`pw` / no-TLS Fuseki setup to production. *(documented as not-for-prod)*
- Building SPARQL by concatenating untrusted strings in an embedding app. *(inferred)*
- Parsing untrusted RDF/XML without external-entity protections. *(inferred)*

## §11a Known non-findings (recurring false positives)

*(Seed list — confirmations are the highest-leverage scan-suppression input.)*

- "Fuseki SPARQL endpoint is open without auth" — public **query** is the documented default; restricting it is the operator's Shiro config. A report is `VALID` only if a *configured* restriction is bypassed or an *update/admin* surface is anonymously reachable. *(documented default)*
- "Default `admin`/`pw`, no TLS" — the example setup, documented as not-for-production → `OUT-OF-MODEL: non-default-build`. *(documented)*

> - "SPARQL query consumes lots of CPU/memory" — pending the §8 resource line; likely operator-tuned (query timeout) unless super-linear on a small query. *(inferred)*

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- "SPARQL query consumes lots of CPU/memory" — pending the §8 resource line; likely operator-tuned (query timeout). *(inferred)*
```

Suggest removing the super-linear comment, the nature of the SPARQL language means it's pretty trivial to write a very small query that calculates a massive cross product e.g. `SELECT * WHERE { ?a ?b ?c . ?d ?e ?f . ?g ?h ?I }` and Jena implements a fully compliant SPARQL engine so any such query likely affects all SPARQL engines not just Jena

| `VALID` | Violates a §8 property via an in-scope adversary/input (config-bypass, anonymous write/admin, SSRF/file-read/XXE/code-exec from an in-scope query under default config). | §8, §6, §7 |
| `VALID-HARDENING` | No §8 property broken, but a §11 misuse is easy enough to harden (safer defaults, SERVICE allow-list, parser limits). | §11 |
| `OUT-OF-MODEL: trusted-input` | Requires operator config (shiro.ini, enabling JS functions, exposing admin) or the embedding app's own untrusted input. | §6, §7 |
| `OUT-OF-MODEL: adversary-not-in-scope` | Requires host/JVM/config control. | §7 |
| `OUT-OF-MODEL: unsupported-component` | Lands in `jena-examples` / tests / benchmarks. | §3 |
| `OUT-OF-MODEL: non-default-build` | Only manifests under a discouraged/non-default §5a setting (example creds, JS functions on, admin exposed). | §5a |
| `BY-DESIGN: property-disclaimed` | Concerns a §9-disclaimed property (operator-enabled code exec, no-TLS-by-default, embedding-app SPARQL injection). | §9 |
| `KNOWN-NON-FINDING` | Matches a §11a entry. | §11a |
| `MODEL-GAP` | Cannot be routed — triggers §12. | §12 |

## §14 Open questions for the maintainers

**Wave 1 — scope & Fuseki defaults:**

> 1. Confirm scope is the `apache/jena` monorepo with **Fuseki + ARQ + RIOT + TDB** as the in-model core, and `jena-examples`/tests/benchmarks out. → §2/§3.

Reviewer 2: Yes

> 2. **SPARQL Update / Graph Store write default:** does a Fuseki dataset ship **read-only** by default, or can it be update-enabled-and-unauthenticated? (Decides whether anonymous write is in-model or a misconfig.) → §5a/§8.

Reviewer 2: I think this depends on the deployment method.

If using Fuseki without a configuration file then the default is read-only unless the `--update` flag is provided

If using Fuseki with a configuration file then only operations stated in the configuration file are available so update requires the update operation to be explicitly configured by the operator, however configuration examples in documentation do show update operations included.

Reviewer: One exception: without configuration and empty memory dataset is writable (no other way to get data in!)

> 3. Confirm the documented default — public query, localhost-only admin, example `admin`/`pw` is not-for-production (`non-default-build`). → §5a/§11a.

Reviewer 2: Yes 💯

**Wave 2 — the high-value query surfaces (the Jena CVE classes):**

> 4. **`SERVICE` federation (SSRF):** is it enabled by default, and can it be disabled / allow-listed? Is an SSRF via `SERVICE` from an anonymous query `VALID`? → §8/§9/§10.

Reviewer 2: - Yes it is enabled by default
- Yes it can be disabled by operator in the configuration file (this is how my $dayjob runs Fuseki)
- I don't believe there is any allow-list capability currently, would be a good hardening point for the project, though @Aklakan's Service Enhancer module may provide some relevant functionality there?
- Yes I think we have to concede that SSRF via `SERVICE` is a valid attack vector, at the very least documentation ought to call this out more explicitly

> 5. **`file:` / arbitrary-URI access** via FROM / FROM NAMED / SERVICE: is local-file read from an untrusted query prevented by default? → §8/§9.

Reviewer 2: Per comments elsewhere on the PR reading arbitrary URIs depends on the dataset implementation configured.  When used with a persistent store like our TDB2 then `FROM`/`FROM NAMED` only provide access to the graphs in the actual dataset and URIs are treated simply as graph names and not accessed

Certainly you can configure Fuseki to allow arbitrary URI access via `FROM`/`FROM NAMED` so again probably a place where we could document recommended configuration better

Reviewer: In default configurations, `FROM` / `FROM NAMED`  are URIs used as names of graph in the dataset - already accessible data via `GRAPH` - even for `file:`

`file:` does not read local storage.

> 6. **ARQ JavaScript / custom functions:** opt-in? If enabled and reachable anonymously, is code execution `VALID` or by-design-operator-enabled? → §5a/§9/§11a.

Reviewer 2: Yes, opt-in and explicit white list for permitted JS functions.

For custom Java functions operator has to explicitly add code to their class path so operator responsibility to verify they trust the custom function code

Code execution is `by-design-operator-enabled`

> 7. **RIOT / RDF-XML XXE:** are external entities (and `file:` fetches) disabled by default in the parsers? → §8.

Reviewer 2: I believe so, this is @afs's area of expertise having rewritten those parsers relatively recently

Reviewer: RDF/XML - XXE is disabled (JenaXMLInput).

JSON-LD has it's own version of the XXE concern.

**Wave 3 — resources, API, meta:**

> 8. **Resource/DoS line** (your volume concern): is an expensive SPARQL query or huge RDF body a bug, or operator-tuned via query-timeout/result-limits? Where's the line? → §8/§11a.

Reviewer 2: I don't think we can treat these are bugs, these are known issues in the wider RDF/SPARQL community and its operator responsibility to apply configuration (e.g. query timeout), request size limits via reverse proxy etc.

Reviewer: We ought to couple with needing to enable `SERVICE` in Fuseki.

(the volume concern I mentioned is number of requests - it can flood a server)

> 9. Confirm the **in-process Java API** is modeled as trusted-caller (embedding-app SPARQL injection is the app's bug), and that parameterised queries are the recommended pattern. → §3/§9.

Reviewer 2: Yes, for in-process its app responsibility to verify untrusted inputs and apply any appropriate hardening

Parameterised queries are recommended pattern

Reviewer: Fuseki itself does not have parameterised queries.

> 10. Any other recurring scanner/fuzzer false positives to seed §11a? → §11a.

Reviewer 2: Probably worth reviewing the [TDB FAQs](https://jena.apache.org/documentation/tdb/faqs.html) page, the following two in particular come to mind that are recurring topics on the mailing lists:

1. [Does Fuseki/TDB have a memory leak?](https://jena.apache.org/documentation/tdb/faqs.html#fuseki-tdb-memory-leak) - Unbounded memory growth under continuous read/write load is a known issue and our use of a WAL ensures no data is lost should the process crash/restart due to this
2. [Why is the database much large on disk than my input?](https://jena.apache.org/documentation/tdb/faqs.html#input-vs-database-size) - This is two-fold, firstly we use sparse files so depending on how disk usage is inspected (and the filesystem in use) different usage metrics can be reported.  Secondly TDB2 uses MVCC trees so each write transaction potentially creates new blocks in the trees orphaning the old blocks (once any active read transactions on the old tree state have completed), this is expected behaviour and we provide a compaction operation that we recommend operators run periodically to reclaim disk space.

Reviewer: Item 1 should be for TDB1 only.

<!--
SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at

    https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
-->

> # Apache Jena — Threat Model (v0 draft)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Apache Jena — Threat Model (v1)
```

or should we align this to Jena version? (it is unlikely to change every version)

```suggestion
# Apache Jena — Threat Model (v1 for Jena 6.1.0+)
```

Reviewer 2: I don't think we need to mention the Jena version in the Threat Model version, the Threat Model can be versioned separately and likely only needs versioning if a new component is introduced or some hitherto unknown threat vector is uncovered and requires documentation

Reviewer: Ok.

## §1 Header

> - **Project:** Apache Jena (`apache/jena`), `main`, against which this draft was written. A monorepo: the RDF/SPARQL Java framework (`jena-core`, `jena-arq`, `jena-base`, RIOT parsers, `jena-tdb1`/`jena-tdb2` stores, SHACL/ShEx, GeoSPARQL, text index) **and** the Fuseki HTTP server (`jena-fuseki2`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Project:** Apache Jena (`apache/jena`), `main`, against which this draft was written. A monorepo: the RDF/SPARQL Java framework (`jena-core`, `jena-arq`, `jena-base`, RIOT parsers, `jena-tdb1`/`jena-tdb2` stores, SHACL (`jena-shacl`), ShEx (`jena-shex`), GeoSPARQL `jena-geosparql`, text index `jena-text` **and** the Fuseki HTTP server (`jena-fuseki2`).
```
Add repo names.

- **Version binding:** versioned with the project; a report against version *N* is triaged against the model as it stood at *N*.
- **Reporting cross-reference:** §8-property violations → report privately per ASF process (`security@apache.org` → `private@jena.apache.org`); §3/§9 findings are closed citing this document.
- **Provenance legend:** *(documented)* = Jena's own docs/repo; *(maintainer)* = confirmed by a Jena PMC member through this process (andy@ has ratified destination + the help-with-model request); *(inferred)* = reasoned from architecture, not yet confirmed — each has a matching §14 open question.
- **Confidence:** v1, PMC-reviewed — rvesse + afs answered every §14 question and folded their inline edits in; the high-value query-surface claims (SERVICE/SSRF, file/URI, JS functions, XXE, JSON-LD remote-context, the resource line) are now *(maintainer)*.

> - **What Jena is:** Apache Jena is a Java framework for building Semantic-Web / linked-data applications over RDF. It provides an in-process API to RDF data held in memory or in a native store (TDB), the ARQ SPARQL query/update engine, RIOT parsers/serialisers for RDF syntaxes (Turtle, RDF/XML, JSON-LD, N-Triples, …), and **Fuseki** — a standalone HTTP server exposing SPARQL query, SPARQL Update, and the Graph Store Protocol over the network. *(documented — README, jena.apache.org; maintainer — andy@ 2026-06-01: "an HTTP-based data server (Fuseki) and a Java API to RDF data stored in memory and in a custom database")*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **What Jena is:** Apache Jena is a Java framework for building Semantic-Web / linked-data applications using RDF and SPARQL. It provides an in-process API to RDF data held in memory or in a native store (TDB), the ARQ SPARQL query/update engine, RIOT parsers/serialisers for RDF syntaxes (Turtle, RDF/XML, JSON-LD, N-Triples, …), and **Fuseki** — a standalone HTTP server exposing SPARQL query, SPARQL Update, and the Graph Store Protocol over the network. *(documented — README, jena.apache.org; maintainer — andy@ 2026-06-01: "an HTTP-based data server (Fuseki) and a Java API to RDF data stored in memory and in a custom database")*
```

  - **embedding application** (Java API) — trusted; supplies queries/RDF to the library. *(inferred)*

**Component-family table** *(monorepo; in/out of model):*

| Family | Entry point | Touches OS/network | In model? |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Fuseki HTTP server | `jena-fuseki2` — SPARQL query / Update / Graph Store Protocol, admin `/$/*` | network (listens) | **In — primary boundary** *(documented)* |
| SPARQL engine (ARQ) | `jena-arq` — query/update eval, `SERVICE` federation, custom functions | network out (SERVICE), file (file: URLs) | **In — high value** *(inferred)* |
| RDF I/O (RIOT) | `jena-arq`/`jena-core` parsers (RDF/XML, Turtle, JSON-LD, …) | parses untrusted RDF | **In — XXE / parser-DoS surface** *(inferred)* |
| Stores + text index | `jena-tdb1`, `jena-tdb2`; **`jena-text` (Lucene)** | filesystem | **In.** On-disk store is operator-trusted and private to the owning process *(maintainer)*; the Lucene text index is reachable from SPARQL via `text:query` — an in-model query surface *(maintainer — afs flagged jena-text)* |
| IRI / langtag | `jena-iri3986`, `jena-langtag`, `jena-base` | none | **In (input parsing)** *(inferred)* |

> | Validation / extensions | `jena-shacl`, `jena-shex`, `jena-geosparql`, `jena-serviceenhancer` | SERVICE | **In (reachable from queries)** *(inferred)* |

Reviewer: Split validations as they have "imports" whereas SERVICE is SPARQL/Service Enhancer.
`jena-geosparql` has no outbound actions IIRC.

```suggestion
| Extensions | `jena-geosparql`, `jena-serviceenhancer` | SERVICE | **In (reachable from queries)** *(inferred)* |
| Validations | `jena-shacl`, `jena-shex` | HTTP GET requests |
```

| Fuseki SPARQL Update / GSP | update text / RDF body | **yes — must be authorised** | read-only-by-default or Shiro-gated write; RDF parse hardening |
| RDF parse (RIOT) anywhere | RDF/XML, Turtle, JSON-LD, … | **yes** | RDF/XML XXE off by default *(maintainer)*; bounded nesting/size |
| JSON-LD `@context` resolution (RIOT) | `@context` URL | **yes** | remote-context fetch is **on by default** (SSRF / remote-read) — restrict on untrusted-input endpoints *(maintainer — afs)* |
| `SERVICE <url>` (federation) | target URL | **yes — enabled by default; SSRF is conceded `VALID`** *(maintainer)* | no allow-list yet — disable `SERVICE` or add egress controls on untrusted endpoints |
| `FROM` / `FROM NAMED` URI | dataset URI | **dataset-impl-dependent** *(maintainer)* | with TDB2 these are in-dataset graph names, **not fetched**; only an arbitrary-URI-configured dataset reads `file:`/remote |
| Fuseki admin `/$/*` | dataset mgmt, backups | **must not be on the public net** | localhost-only (default) / operator network |
| Java API (`QueryExecution`, `Model.read`) | query / RDF from the app | no — the embedding app's trust | app validates its own untrusted inputs |

> - **Size/shape/rate:** query-cost / result-size / parser-nesting bounds — to confirm (Andy's volume concern); §8 resource line. *(inferred)*

Reviewer: Confirmed.

```suggestion
- **Size/shape/rate:** query-cost / result-size / parser-nesting bounds; §8 resource line. *(inferred)*
```

- "Fuseki SPARQL endpoint is open without auth" — public **query** is the documented default; restricting it is the operator's Shiro config. A report is `VALID` only if a *configured* restriction is bypassed or an *update/admin* surface is anonymously reachable. *(documented default)*
- "Default `admin`/`pw`, no TLS" — the example setup, documented as not-for-production → `OUT-OF-MODEL: non-default-build`. *(documented)*
- "SPARQL query consumes lots of CPU/memory" — operator-tuned via query timeout + reverse-proxy size limits; a tiny query computing a huge cross-product is inherent to spec-compliant SPARQL (affects every engine), not a Jena bug *(maintainer — rvesse)*.
- "ARQ can call JavaScript / custom functions" — only if the operator enabled them, with a JS allow-list / operator-supplied Java code; `by-design-operator-enabled`. `OUT-OF-MODEL: trusted-input` / `non-default-build` unless reachable anonymously *(maintainer — rvesse)*.
- "Embedding app built an injectable SPARQL string" — the app's bug, not Jena's; parameterised queries are the recommended pattern. `OUT-OF-MODEL: trusted-input` *(maintainer — rvesse)*.

> - "Fuseki/TDB has a memory leak" — unbounded memory growth under continuous read/write load is a known issue; the WAL guarantees no data loss on crash/restart. A recurring mailing-list topic, not a vulnerability *(maintainer — rvesse; TDB FAQ)*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- "Fuseki/TDB1 has a memory leak" — unbounded memory growth under continuous read/write load is a known issue; the WAL guarantees no data loss on crash/restart. A recurring mailing-list topic, not a vulnerability *(maintainer — rvesse; TDB FAQ)*.
```

There are two versions of TDB - different code. The documentation sometimes "TDB" in a context sensitive way. The FAQ is mixed. We can't address in time.

<!--
SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at

    https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
-->

# Apache Jena — Threat Model (v1)

## §1 Header

> - **Project:** Apache Jena (`apache/jena`), `main`, against which this draft was written. A monorepo: the RDF/SPARQL Java framework (`jena-core`, `jena-arq`, `jena-base`, RIOT parsers, `jena-tdb1`/`jena-tdb2` stores, SHACL (`jena-shacl`), ShEx (`jena-shex`), GeoSPARQL `jena-geosparql`, text index `jena-text` **and** the Fuseki HTTP server (`jena-fuseki2`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Project:** Apache Jena (`apache/jena`), `main`, against which this threat model was written. A monorepo: the RDF/SPARQL Java framework (`jena-core`, `jena-arq`, `jena-base`, RIOT parsers, `jena-tdb1`/`jena-tdb2` stores, SHACL (`jena-shacl`), ShEx (`jena-shex`), GeoSPARQL `jena-geosparql`, text index `jena-text` **and** the Fuseki HTTP server (`jena-fuseki2`).
```

## §10 Downstream responsibilities (operator/deployer)

- **Put Fuseki behind auth (Shiro) + TLS** before exposing sensitive data; never ship the example `admin`/`pw` setup to production. *(documented)*
- **Keep the admin `/$/*` surface localhost-only / operator-network.** *(documented)*
- **Make datasets read-only unless write is intended**, and gate SPARQL Update / GSP behind Shiro. *(inferred)*
- **Restrict or disable `SERVICE` federation and `file:` access** on endpoints reachable by untrusted clients (SSRF / local-file). *(inferred)*
- **Do not enable ARQ JavaScript/custom functions on untrusted endpoints.** *(inferred)*
- **Set query timeouts / result-size limits** appropriate to capacity (the volume lever). *(inferred)*
- **Use parameterised queries** (`QueryBuilder`/parameterised `QueryExecution`) in embedding apps; never string-concatenate untrusted input into SPARQL. *(inferred)*

## §11 Known misuse patterns

> *(Draft one-liners — expand before publishing.)*

Reviewer: Presumably remove for final first version

```suggestion
```

> - Exposing a public, update-enabled SPARQL endpoint with no auth. *(inferred)*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Leaving `SERVICE` reachable from anonymous queries (SSRF / file read). *(inferred)*
```
`file:` for queries does not mean a local file. It is just a URL name that is not deferenced.
